As a runner, chances are you've frequently thought about how much strength training, yoga, meditation or improving your diet could benefit your running.

Or maybe you’re not even a runner. Not important. Maybe you’re just a bit bored with your current life setup and thinking about trying out something new. Learning a new skill, be it for a purely physical aspect or you wouldn’t mind a bit of that brain-train as well.

And then there’s the community thing, meeting a new group of interesting individuals is always a bonus.

At least that was my case, I started bouldering a couple of years back, as a form of strength training, as an addition which would improve my running. Hopefully. And gym just wasn’t an option at this point of my life. Soon enough I was really happy my expectations were not just met, but much more so, because I realized that climbing is providing me much wanted body and mind balance, which I am super curious to investigate while practicing a certain discipline. For me bouldering is as much mental if not more than physical. The presence in the moment, call it mindfulness or however you wish, just being there – without being there, focused on only one thing, the next move of your hand, or the next step, for me it relates to yoga, running and even more so, trail running, on more than one level.

But that’s just me and we aren’t here to talk about me.

Hey Anja!

So, in my not so short intro, I’ve tried to sum up what bouldering means to me. So, let’s kick it off from here, dive right in. What does climbing mean to you?

Climbing for me is simply just part of my life. It isn’t a hobby anymore, something I do in my free time. It’s something I do on a regular basis, just like school for example. So, to put it shortly, for me it’s a part of my life that I immensely enjoy.

So, to zoom out a bit, explain it to the folks, just in case; what types of climbing are out there, and which ones do you do and love doing?

The most known types are the three disciplines: speed, lead and boulder. We can climb indoor, or outdoors. Outdoors there are plenty of possibilities, such as trad climbing, big wall climbing, just regular bouldering and lead climbing, crack climbing, and for the bold and fearless ones: free solo climbing. The difference between all of these is mainly in how you get to the top and what kind of protection you use to do that. However, a very important difference is between bouldering and lead climbing. In lead climbing you go up a taller route/rock and you are protected with a rope and some other gear, while in bouldering you climb a smaller rock, and if you fall, you fall on mats. I climb routes on which you don’t need as much equipment and that are easier in that aspect. So basically, I don’t really do trad, big wall climbing but also, I don’t free solo, of course. I climb on shorter routes, whether it is outdoors or indoors, bouldering, lead...

What types of climbing are available in Croatia? I suppose, in general, similar as in Europe and the world, but you’re the expert...

In Croatia you can do pretty much everything, or almost everything you could do somewhere else. The only difference is that we have a bit worse conditions and climbing is less developed than in some other countries, such as Italy or France.

Let’s rewind to the very start of your journey. When did you decide to become a badass? Why did you start climbing?

I started when I was around 9. My dad said that I should do some kind of sport to be healthy and active, so we began the search. I have tried so many sports, from volleyball, to gymnastics and basketball, but none of them really did it for me. Then, one day, my dad saw a poster about a gym that was offering classes in climbing for kids, so he signed me up. As soon as I arrived and tried it, I immediately loved it. So, I pretty much started climbing every weekend with my dad and my best friend and I just loved it.

What was your motivation back then?

I wouldn’t say I really had a motivation, I wasn’t climbing for anyone but myself, because I wasn’t a competitive climber yet. I just climbed because I loved doing it, and so I didn’t really need motivation, just climbing.

Has your motivation changed over time? Was there a time you wanted to quit, or were you just thinking about trying something new?

My motivation has definitely changed, but for the better. I always want more, and want to be better, and I am more and more motivated as I go. I actually never had any moments I wanted to quit; I always knew this was what I wanted. Even after a bad session I always know that I am not quitting, and I always come back to the gym or the rock.

How important is the climbing community for you?

It is extremely important for me. All the people I met while climbing are amazing, and some of them are my best friends. Just like in every other sport or thing you do, you want to be surrounded by people who share the same passion as you, who motivate you, and who support you.

Would you say there is a mental aspect in climbing and how do you experience it? Is it something you find important for your overall success in the sport and just everyday training, or you think it’s more of an individual approach?

I think that climbing is an extremely difficult sport, not just physically, but also mentally. My biggest struggles are always because of the mental aspect. It is such a difficult element because it’s not something you can get that easily. It is not easy to always have the mental approach that is very much needed. I think that a lot of the fights that happen while training and competing go on in your mind, and you must find that mental approach that you need for comps and trainings.

So, how do you tackle these situations, fight your fights? Do you have a certain mind practice in addition to a physical training, like meditation, visualization, or breathing techniques?

That is the hardest thing to prepare for because there is nothing you can do that will completely help you. I don't really prepare ahead of time, but I do have some rituals and habits I do. First off, all day before the competition I like to lie down before sleep, breathe and give myself a little "pep-talk" let's say. At first, I did that unconsciously, but now it has kind of become part of my routine. On the day of the competition, when I'm warming up, I always take a little bit of time to compose myself and my thoughts. But after that I just try to relax and enjoy as much as I can, because after all, that is the most important thing. I also have some "superstitions" let's say. I know they don't mean anything, but they are now just a habit. For example, I will rarely post on social media that I have an upcoming comp also, I rarely climb with braids in my hair.

As a Croatian representative in sport climbing, what is the highest grade you climbed and was it in a comp or training?

The highest grade I did in bouldering was I think 7c or 7c+, and lead climbing it was an 8a. These are grades that I did while training. I never actually know the grades of competition routes and boulders.

What’s your dream spot for climbing on the rock?

I desperately wish to get a chance to climb in Fontainblue or somewhere in Greece. Those are places where I want to climb so much, and I hope I will get the chance to do it.

Boulder, lead or speed?

I personally prefer bouldering because it is harder to figure out what I am supposed to do to get to the top, and that element of figuring out what and how to do something just makes it more fun for me. However, lead is a close second, but it is harder for me to mentally adapt to lead than to boulder. And for speed, let’s just say I’m not the biggest fan, although I do enjoy it from time to time.

Gym or rock?

As a competition climber, I spend most of my time in the gym, but it always feels nice to go back to the rock and just relax and enjoy your time up there on the route.

Does rock climbing provide you a certain sense of closeness to nature? Maybe help align your body and mind, preparing you for the challenges ahead, both in training and comps?

I wouldn't really say it brings me some sort of closeness to nature, but it does relax me. Being outside, doing what I love but with no pressure, always feels amazing and relaxing. And being in such a calm and peaceful environment it’s just what I need every now and then. And to me one of the best things when I'm climbing outside is getting to the top, turning around and see the world beneath me. The huge valleys, forests or whatever is under me.

So, parkour. Or freerunning, as some call it, right? Correct me if I’m wrong.

As I am practicing martial arts for quite some time now, the notion of ‘ultimate movement’ if I may call it this way, intrigues me very much.

I’ve spent some time researching the skill.

It is of French origins, right? The man, I really can’t recall the name ran on rooftops among other places.

You’re not running on rooftops, or are you?

…and I feel I would need to make a kind disclaimer, we of the TC crowd do not in any way condone this sort or risky behavior... but nevertheless it is a badass skill, in my book. So, let’s start.

Hi Tena!

Tena, why parkour?

Honestly, I started just because I thought it was fun and different, but now as some years have passed and as I learned about the origins and met new people from the community, I realized there were many more reasons to do it than just it being fun.

How did you start and where?

I think we’ve all seen Parkour and Freerunning compilations on YouTube, and that’s how I stumbled across of it 6 years ago. During that time, I started training with my friend from middle school in 2016; we would just go out and do some easy precision jumps and vaults over some small brick walls. It just started with us jumping around our neighborhood, when we heard there was gonna be a Parkour workshop for beginners near our school so we went to check it out, and gathered some info on where we can train with others like us, and that was in Parkour škola, on Velesajam (Zagreb).

A silly question, I am sure, but I need to ask; aren’t you afraid of hurting yourself? And have you gotten hurt?

Of course I am afraid, but the adrenaline and happiness after doing a jump you wanted to do for a long time makes me so happy its worth to feel a little uncomfortable sometimes. Accidents happen, of course, but we get through them pretty quickly.

I do know, from my short research I mentioned, there are special gyms, like polygons, where you can train safely, right? Special gyms? But there isn’t really a 100% appropriate space in Zagreb to train, is there? A parkour gym? A multidisciplinary space, if I may call it this way?

Big indoor training spots are a dream of every traceur, since it makes learning some new vaults or flips much easier and helps with mental blocks that sometimes stop us from doing jumps. Unfortunately, there aren’t any gyms dedicated entirely to parkour in Croatia, which makes us very sad. We rarely train in gymnastics gyms and trampoline parks, because those are made for other sports, we can’t do as much as we want there.

On the bright side, there is a Parkour park on the island of Krk which is an only outdoor parkour gym in our country, but its far away from Zagreb, so we go there rarely.

Where are the spots where you train?

As I have mentioned, we don’t really train indoors, but we’ve found many good training spots around Zagreb city center, so, outdoors, for example Savica and Ksaver. We are mostly looking for places with a bunch of walls and rails. Lack of indoor training spots doesn’t really affect our training anymore, since we got used to doing everything outside, which we actually prefer.

Who do you roll with? (pun intended)

I like the pun, lol.

I found a very warm and welcoming community in Parkour škola, then became close friends with some of them and now not only we train together, but we hang out too. I mostly hangout with people my age or a few years older, but trainers in Parkour škola are also very approachable and fun to hang out with. It’s especially heartwarming to see people on parkour JAMs, which are big community gatherings that happen a few times a year. They are most often organized in Zagreb, Rijeka, Zadar and Krk, and that's how we meet other parkour people from our or foreign countries. We always say, the more the merrier.

Are you guys formed as a crew? Is there a community in Zagreb and Croatia?

I guess you can call Parkour škola a team, but it’s more of a group training where you try to progress as an individual, and work on your strength and technique since there aren't any parkour competitions happening in Croatia, although they are popular abroad. I honestly don't like the idea of competing because I think progressing my skills for me is much more important than for a competition. It’s of course fun to watch those competitions and see some more popular parkour people do their stuff, but I don't think I would ever consider joining something like that myself.

What is the community like abroad?

Parkour community is actually much bigger than people might think. In the last few years, the sport became more popular so some people decided to make a job out of it as influencers because of their amazing skills. That's kind of a controversial question since some people think it would be better if that wasn't a case, because it makes people sometimes question are they doing it because they actually like jumping and want to progress for themselves or for the fame and money. I honestly like the idea of it because of the world we live in and because of how much we use Internet for everything... it should get more hype online. Social media, especially Instagram helps us meet other traceurs and makes it easier to expand the community. For example, I met a really nice girl from UK and I will meet her this Summer for some parkour sessions in London. People sometimes even reach out to us because they are coming to Zagreb and want to explore parkour spots here and train with someone new.

For how long have you been practicing parkour and what does the training look like?

I've been practicing parkour since 2016, so for 6 years, even though I feel like it’s been much shorter, but time passes by really fast.

Do you guys just kinda meet and hang, so to say, like just, rolling around, having fun? ...looking at some of your videos, it looks like ultimate fun. But I am sure, there is a process behind it?

I guess the training depends on how much people are attending. When there is just a few of us, we usually have a nice chill session and then sometimes coffee afterwards, but when there is a bunch of people there, for example JAMs I feel like our energy kind of rises and we're all jumping like crazy and our motivation rises. Our training starts with a warm up, so running or quadrupedal (on all fours) and then we decide if we're gonna do some easy flow around the spot or some bigger jumps like long precisions or running precisions. Whatever we're doing, we're always hyping each other up, giving each other tips for a better technique and helping if someone gets injured.

Would you care to share your thoughts on the process, training routine?

Our training routine is almost the same every time, as I've said, a warmup, jumping and rolling and then stretching so we avoid muscle soreness. Sessions are most often happening during the day, but we also jump at night, which makes us a little more nervous. My favorite time to practice is in the morning or later afternoon, on the days I'm not busy with school or other hobbies so I can put all of my concentration in to jumping.

Have you thought about incorporating additional routines, practices to improve your skill?

Most of us just do some strength exercises, since it makes jumping much easier, especially for arms and legs. If I had more spare time, I would honestly try gymnastics or break dance since those sports have some similar moves and I think it would step up my parkour game for a bit. But I'm fine with just this because I've never felt such a passion for a sport before.

It looks like super fun and easy, at first glimpse, but I am aware, it is always so with every discipline when I look at a person who is good at it, almost a master of the art so to say, what do you think?

I think it definitely needs some time and patience to start feeling a little more confident about doing jumps, because most of it are just mental blocks. Even though some vaults or bigger jumps need more time and require more strength I think progressing in flow and making the moves you're doing feel connected and flow like water can be learned much quicker. It’s just getting to know how to connect certain moves smoothly.

Do you consider it being an ultimate form of movement?

Definitely yes. Parkour is a skill that requires every part of the body to move constantly, every muscle and every limb is important at all times, which makes us much stronger but much more tired.

Do you just “free run” (or run free) in urban settings or do you do it in nature as well?

Our training can literally happen anywhere. On a bench, on some walls or climbing trees. Of course, we most often practice in urban settings because we live in Zagreb, but it excites us to change that up a bit sometimes. We really enjoy some training in nature, specifically on trees with a bunch of branches for some precision jumps or laches.

To sum it up, how would you describe the mental state you find yourself in while practicing? Have you given it some thought? The process is really interesting for me, the connection of body and mind, would you say you are in some special sphere? A bubble which protects you? A zone?

It honestly depends on how I'm feeling outside of parkour. Most of the time it’s kind of an escape from reality and it relaxes the body and thoughts but sometimes, speaking now, just how I relieve it if I'm in a really bad headspace it can be a little bit tricky since its sometimes a little frustrating if mentally, I can't make myself do a jump I want to. But that happens really rarely so I would say it definitely helps with mental health.

Tena, if a person wants to try parkour, or practices already, how can one get in touch?

It's best to hit us up via our Facebook page Parkour Škola.

Winter’s in full affect, Spring just around the corner, ‘a New Life’ (pun intended)…

So one board is in use now, but will soon be replaced with another one, right? You all like decks…

Hey Ladies!

But let me stop with the cryptic talk, which one of you would like to explain what your two crews are about?

Nikolina – BZona
Iva – Cruising ladies

Which one was formed first, BZona or Cruising Ladies?

Nikolina
This is so strange, how these two crews wound up together, or maybe it was destiny, kiddin'. Bzona was founded in 2004. as a non-profit organization with a goal to promote Snowboarding as a sport and in 2017. (I think) maybe 2018. the old crew decided to pass the organization on younger generations.

Iva
BZona has many goals, one of them is promoting snowboarding among women and creating a much-needed community for girls in this sport. There were some members of Cruising ladies that were already shredding during Winter with BZona so when the spring came (2021.) most of the girls just kept hanging and switched „snow“ for „long“, in the light of this „shred girls“ idea, with the goal of keeping this girl community alive during warm months. Some of the girls were already cruising around with the idea of forming an all-girl longboard crew, while other were getting this idea at the same time so we kind of all ended up together through the mutual acquaintances and formed a crew. So basically, there would be no Cruising ladies without BZona. Mutual passion and lifestyle is what gave this crew life, but the support and feeling you get as a girl from your girlfriends while doing these kinds of things is something else, this is what kept the girls going.

So, to answer, Cruising ladies is about creating community for girls, giving all the girls who lack this kind of support an opportunity to have company, support, and a place to share skills, learn new things, make them feel appreciated for their hobbies and most important – to have fun!

Let’s continue with the ‘past’, so to speak… so, snowboarding, how and why have you decided to try and have stuck with this Winter discipline?

Nikolina
I think most snowboarders have the same story, first tried skiing shortly realized that snowboarders are much cooler (:D) and with the board you can do more amusing stuff. Once you learn the basics you can choose the discipline which inspires you most. My favorite discipline is Slopestyle; BoarderCross, BigAir, Halfpipe, and FreeRide are also fun (for me) but sliding on rails and bars provides me with feeling mixed with adrenaline, joy, happiness, and satisfaction.

Is it just love and fun, or have you ever thought of trying to ride pro? Is this even possible in Croatia? Talking about pro riding in general, what disciplines are there?

Now it is fun and desire to share this amazing sport with kids and people around me, but in past I had some years of training and doing FIS competitions trying to catch points so you can end up higher on FIS rang list. It went well, in 2016. I was 16th in SlopeStyle in Europe, shortly after decided to point my snowboard career in educational direction, so now I'm in the Croatian Demo Team passing knowledge to younger generations and people who want to be a snowboard instructor.

It is funny, because with so little snow here, we have actually very good riders, for example, Dante Brčić who won Youth Olympics Games in 2022. Also in Croatia, we have two mountains Sljeme and Platak where you can go skiing and snowboarding for a very good price.

I would conclude, you love to travel, right? Visit new places, get to know new interesting (groups of) people? Would you care to share some of your experiences?

Yes, that's true. I think it is impossible that year goes by without travel. One of the best experiences was the time when I went to the place called Niseko on Hokkaido, a popular ski resort in Japan. I spent 7 days there and every day 15 cm of snow would fall, so you could ride fresh powder every day, we were like kids in the sandbox.

What places in Europe and then world, are great for riding, and let us cover everything, a little bit for comp and ofc, your fav spots?

There are a lot of nice ski resorts in Europe, but I always aim for resorts that have snowparks. Community in snowparks is so special, you are surrounded by people that have the same interests and share the same passion for this sport. You can always learn some new tricks and gain some good bits of advice from other riders. I think the best places to snowboard in snowparks are Flahauwinkl in Austria and Laax in Switzerland, they have parks several ski trails long. It is like paradise!

What spots would you recommend in Croatia, for example to a rider visiting from abroad?

As I have mentioned earlier, I would always recommend visiting Sljeme and Platak mountain, they are beautiful in winter and summer. Both paces have snowparks and good slopes to ride.

Last year, (2022.), you’ve built a Snowpark on Sljeme (the peak of Zagreb’s Medvednica mountain). Why have you decided to take this action and how difficult was the process? Where there obstacles and overall, are you satisfied with the end result?

Historically speaking, there were so many attempts to open Snowpark on Sljeme but none went well, till this year. Matija Pogorilić and I started thinking about how to approach it, and after too many meetings, some were promising, and some were total disaster we decided to do a crowdfunding campaign, so we collected a small amount of money to create obstacles in the Snowpark and to pay for necessary costs. As always bureaucracy was too complex with no reason, but we managed to get all permits, so we did it!

We are so glad this year went very well, you could see people from all generations visiting Snowpark, enjoying jibbing and chilling, just enjoying the great atmosphere. This year we could see some youngsters doing their thing on boxes, rails, and kickers, we can see some good future.

What would you say is the future of the sport in Croatia?

First of all, global warming is a BIG issue, so please take care of nature and don't use plastic, do dispose of waste, and so on…

In Croatia future of this sport are children who use Snowpark, kids who will continue enjoying in this wonderful lifestyle.

So, you organize kid sessions as well. What are your thoughts about the next gen of riders?

Yes! This year we could see some good kids doing tricks and enjoying riding, so we are doing a training program on snow for season 2023./2024. Next year we will organize more sessions for kids and adults.

Could be a dumb question, but bear with me, are there more female or male riders?

Hahaha, excuse me, yes this is the thing with extreme sports and genders, guys are always into it more than girls. But you can always see some shred girl doing her thing on obstacles. ;)

And let me continue with another dumb one, because I know it’s highly individual, but let me put it out there still, how long does it take to learn how to ride, decently?

No, this is a good one! The person will learn how to ride in 3 to 4 days, beginnings are not so easy, there will be a lot of falls and wet asses, but eventually joy of riding board compensates for all of that. And it is so interesting you can progress at any stage of knowledge.

Let’s talk about the process, the training, the learning curve. What was your process like?

Uh, do not know what to tell you...everyone has their own path, it has ups and downs.

What is each one of your motivations, to stay in the sport, ofc except the love for it? Even more so, with the small scene in Croatia?

For me, feeling when you land a trick with style and at same time it is filmed on camera is THE BEST thing that cannot replace anything. Without that I would quit snowboarding a long time ago.

Even though the scene is small in Croatia it is beautiful to be part of it, hopefully, we will have new generations and my goal is to bring this beautiful sport closer to people of Croatia.

So, what is the Croatian snowboarding community like?

Usually, when people first come to the community they are like: „oh look at them they are arrogant and presumptuous “, but when you come in and get to know all of the people they will help you to improve your snowboarding skills and soon before you realized it, you will be a part of Snowboard community.

Can you see room for improvement and what would it take? Would you be the instigators, leaders, and supporters? Or you already are?

Oh, of course, there is always a place for improvement, we are planning to do a better park next year (add more easy obstacles) and have lot of ideas for sessions. We are planning one session just for kids and one session as a competition for riders from Europe. You know how they say, break a leg. :D

Ok, let us now switch to warmer topics so to speak; hot weather calls for a different kind of board, right? Are you riding or have you thought about kitesurfing or wakeboarding? Also, the asphalt cruise, skateboard, and longboard?

Once you try this board you will never get off it :D When there is no snow, we must replace it so other boards are very welcome. Wakeboarding is amazing! It is like a snowboard, but it is on water, somehow it sounds easier, but you would be surprised! It can hurt a lot. :') Feeling of doing tricks on wake is almost the same as snowboarding. So, I would recommend it to anyone!

Let’s focus on longboard and talk about the Cruising Ladies.

Concluding from the name, you are an all girl crew right?

Iva
Yes, we are. Originally formed out of 6 girls, most of whom met up while snowboarding. Now we have some extra members but funnily enough, most of the additional girl members also shred during Winter. Of course, our goal is to promote this among women and organize cruises for all the girls who wanna join, simply hang out, travel, learn and improve skills and have a good time.

Is there a reason behind the decision, or was it organic? Do you just cruise, or are some of you also riding downhill?

As I mentioned in the beginning, the reason was to keep „the spark“ alive in non-winter months. What do you do when snowboarding season ends? Fall into depression. Just kidding. You hop on another board, and as Nikolina mentioned, wakeboarding is also really cool thing to do but longboarding is something you can do literally every day, in your lunch break, during your trip to work, go cruising instead of coffee, hang out casually, cruise and joke around and it does not cost a thing (except for a few ankles and knees :D)

Some of the girls have tried downhill, some of them are planning to. It was a big wish of ours to try this one out as a crew, but it takes a bit more preparation, proper equipment, a bit of knowledge and advice from more experienced downhill riders. As we can see and hear from our downhill friends, it is fun and really rewarding, adrenalin wise.

Where do you cruise in Zagreb, or is this a concept with no space and time, so to say?

We started mostly on lake Jarun , as everybody knows, it is a place for recreation, you can have a nice chill cruise without much worries of the traffic, we always ended or started it with a little picnic, some music, some other sport alongside, like slackline of frisbee. We would also do a bit of practicing and skating in the skatepark, try some new stuff out, hang out with the friends and people you meet there. It is always a good vibe there. Sometimes we would go to the city, cruise around the city center, have a night out, have fun on the empty night streets of Zagreb. But mostly it is a concept with no space and time, like you said. Somebody just hits you up with a „wanna go“ question, and you just meet up somewhere, cruise around, try to learn new tricks along the way.

What is the concept behind Cruising Ladies?

The concept is more of a lifestyle and a vibe. This is not just a sport for us, it is not just something we do while waiting for the real sport to begin in the winter. Original Cruising ladies were a really diverse group of ladies in the age range around 20-27 (then), all very similar but very different. Each contributed to the group in her own way. We had a lot of different hobbies and traits which made us learn a lot ff new stuff from each other. The thing that bound us together was this lifestyle that gave us all some kind of purpose and a sense of belonging, especially during corona times. We started cruising, going to events, having these daily picnics, meetups, trips, skatepark sessions. We also traveled together a lot, cruised on the coast, had cool experiences in the new places. You see the different perspectives of the places when you cruise through them. We went wakeboarding together, as well. So basically, we just switch boards and feel happy while being on one. :) Of course, it would be cool to develop these skills more and turn it into a more serious thing as well, we are working on it!

I think the most important thing is to have and feel passion while doing something because it makes you feel happy and fulfilled. There is always room for progress, but it is what keeps you going and gives you the thrill.
